---
title: Belief & Learning
tags: nontech, life
---

Belief is important to me to function, but I generally don't believe in myself too much.
Many people do; I envy them. There is a strategy I employ when thinking about myself.
It's called useless-until-proven-otherwise. That's why I take pride in being useful and when the supposed
usefulness was called into question, I get annoyed with myself. I don't mind when I fail myself.
I take it very hard when I fail others.

One of the things I want to believe in is about learning. I want to believe that it doesn't matter who you are
or what your mental disposition is, as long as you want to learn something,
there is a way for you to effectively learn it.
This intense belief has served as a moral and spiritual compass in my quest through life.
When I lose touch with it, I get annoyed with myself.

I think this belief comes from the education I received as a kid. It was a cut-throat education which put emphasis
on getting ahead of the intellectual curve. My favorite cynical saying is that of a friend's: "As long as
you can win math competition, it doesn't matter how emotionally and physically fucked you are".
When I grow up and still feel the presence of this mindset in the environment around me,
I get annoyed with myself for being a part of it.

I want to believe that learning is kind and compassionate. As long as you show an eagerness to learn and improve,
you shouldn't be judged. It shouldn't be used to fulfill the need for validation; learning should itself
be fulfilling. So when people come to me using their learning poweress to belittle others, I get annoyed with them.
And with myself for the lack thereof.

I like to know things. I like to figure out how stuff work. But not knowing how learning works best annoys
the hell out of me.
