---
title: On the most important skill I want to have
tags: tech, work
---

Probably higly advanced algorthmic and optimization skills to scale my code on the GPU... Nah!

A few months ago I had a conversation with someone I deeply admired. The conversation left a huge impact on me at the time
and I have been meditating on it ever since. In my opinion, he is without a doubt among the most gifted software developers I know.
I had tried really hard to get him into my team so he could help us all level up. And at some point, this conversation happened.
It started out as a tiny passing remark about a concise way to turn JS's `arguments` into an Array.

> lim [11:52 AM] </br>
>   also to turn arguments into array there is a trick `args = Array.prototype.slice.call(arguments)`</br>
> xyz [11:52 AM] </br>
>   it is bad ^ </br>
> lim [11:52 AM]</br>
>   because?</br>
> xyz [11:52 AM]</br>
>   arguments is not an array, it is an object. And js community has stop doing that anyway.</br>
>   performance is one of the reason</br>
> lim [11:53 AM]</br>
>   but isn’t what you are doing the same thing? producing an array from arguments?</br>
> xyz [11:53 AM]</br>
>   no I am not</br>

```
   for (var _len = arguments.length, funcs = Array(_len), _key = 0; _key < _len; _key++) {
       funcs[_key] = arguments[_key];</br>
   }
```

>   different</br>

I remember getting quite upset at this point but couldn't really pin-point the reason. Now in retrospect, it seems clear.
I wanted to be heard. I wanted my opinion to be at least considered by someone whose opinions mattered to me and from whom
I wanted to learn. Instead, the classic js-community-has-stopped-doing-that-anyway-because-performance was thrown at my
face, which by the way is total bollocks, without so much as a simple thought
because he had already made up his mind that I was wrong beforehand. Although as I would later find out in the following months
that this is the person's general mode of operation and therefore was able to navigate our conversations a bit more effectively,
the point remains.

On the other hand, I have also recently had the privilege of working with someone equally talented as well as opinionated
but from the other end of the spectrum. He always painstakingly explains his position to everyone who cares to listen and, vice versa,
lends an ear wholeheartedly whenever other people need it. I feel like after two years of feeling stuck with my skillsets, I have found
a way to move on, all thanks to him and his empathetic listening. Looking back at all the great leaders I have followed over the years,
I realize that all of them are very good listeners too.

So here it is, the skill that I want to improve, especially now that I am having more responsibility and the stake is higher.
I want to listen better.
